welcome to your brothers and sisters wonderful to
see you again in week two of our
series titled change of heart
if you remember last week we covered several
headings we started off by looking at why
we've
chosen this particular topic i introduced it by
saying that post
lockdown conversations with certain brothers of ours and
neighbors and friends made it clear that there
was a lot of grime that had
accumulated on our hearts collectively due to lockdown
and that the real struggle was not so
much the physical
one but the internal one and then if
you remember we went on to cover seven
headings
as per why this topic is of utmost
importance
and then we concluded that section by saying
that this study of the hearts is
therefore not a wasilla a means it is
an end it is something that you
study in of itself not to get you
to another science the value is intrinsic
then we opened up the topic to speak
about the different uh arabic terminologies for
the human heart and we spoke about which
word and then we spoke about the second
one
which was and then the third one which
was which was it
the center of reasoning now we start a
new session for me to be comfortable
in order to really begin this study which
will be next week i i really think
that at least two sessions in terms of
an introduction to
this topic was key so this is the
second introductory topic our predecessors live their lives
almost
literally with one eye on the world and
the other eye looking inwardly focusing on the
heart
not allowing their internal state to play tricks
on them for them the condition of the
heart
was an existential priority much more than our
efforts
are focused on searching for a physical doctor
a physiological doctor a financial expert
a career advisor they placed however a huge
level of importance
of tracking down a spiritual heart doctor that
can help them clear away the grime that
accumulates from the heart
and they wouldn't have it any other way
and i want to share with you a
few examples starting from the greatest of them
all
our nabi muhammad sallallahu alaihi wasallam and how
conscious he was towards his heart and then
we move our way down chronologically
imam muslim narrates on the authority of that
our beloved alaihi wasallam said
i sometimes feel that my heart is covered
with veils
and i ask allah to forgive me 100
times a day focus on his consciousness of
his heart
and he said even me who is connected
to the heavens with respect to revelation i
communicate with the angels allah has
chosen me i feel sometimes clouds are obscuring
my heart and i ask allah to pardon
me one hundred times a day
as for the companions of the beloved sallallahu
alaihi wasallam they display the same level of
keenness
to ensure that their hearts remain pure look
at for example
how the companions would ask the prophet sallallahu
alaihi was sent in various questions taking the
initiative they wouldn't wait for an advice to
be
given to them they would say to him
alcini please give me advice how can we
improve our internal state of
affairs what can we do give us advice
one of them he said to the prophet
ali salam
or messenger of allah give me advice but
please keep it concise he gave him a
three-part bit of advice
if you adhere to it watch how success
will come into our lives he said to
him
when you get up to pray treat it
as if it's your farewell prayer number two
let's
be aware of singing something that will necessitate
an apology tomorrow
what and never look at what the hands
of people possess
be careless towards it so look at how
the sahaba they came to him advise me
or messenger of allah
advise me o messenger of allah look at
the keenness he said to him
he said my advice to you is that
you are shy of allah be shy of
allah the same way that you are shy
from the righteous
man in your community do you see their
brothers and sisters and abu dharda the companion
he said
that abdullah who died in which battle
the battle of mutter so here you have
a shahid who's talking you want to know
how he ascended those heights listen to what
his day-to-day
look like abdullahi would take the hand of
abu bada
and he would say to him come with
me let us
increase our iman together for a moment allahu
akbar many companions would say this to one
another come with me for a moment let's
just interrupt the business
for just a second let us increase our
iman for a moment he said the companions
would sometimes
gather in a halaqa and amir al-mu'min omar
he would say to abu musa you know
abu musa who would recite quran
and angels would make themselves present and he
would say abu musa recite to us for
some quran
help us soften our hearts he begins his
recitation and the sahaba
are just there absorbing the kalam the speech
of allah subhanahu wa do you see their
keenness brothers and sisters to never allow that
internal compass to go
south in fact he said about the
islam was every one of them feared hypocrisy
for his heart every one of them
feared hypocrisy the prospect of being a mun
afique these are lively hearts that are brimming
with
life and light when you move down to
the tabi in the second generation those who
came after the companions you see the same
level of
attention to the hearts who actually dug for
himself a grave in
his living room imagine that he dug for
himself a pit a grave in his living
room that he would use to soften
his heart whenever he felt that it was
going course when he felt a hardness in
his heart he would go to the living
room he'd remove
the plank and he'd sit inside and close
it and he stays there imagining what the
grave is going to be like
and then he says my lord returned me
my lord returned me what is he doing
he's reciting from surah al-mu'min that allah tells
us that when they go into their grave
this
is what they will say my lord allow
us to go back to the dunya he
would say my lord return me my lord
return me so that i may do good
deeds in the life i've left behind
and then when he begins to sweat and
he's suffocated he can't take it no more
he kicks out the plank and he leaves
and then he says to himself
you've come back you said my lord return
me you've been returned
so do good deeds right now change your
ways before a day comes you will call
and you will not be returned
and then you have al-hasan al-basri despite being
a scholar a mother an
exegete a scholar of a judge a counsellor
an imam
he decided to dedicate a halacha a private
halacha in his home for the likes of
these topics that we are discussing this evening
purely to speak about the imaniyat the internal
spiritual dimensions of worship hearts how to rectify
them how to draw
near to allah wa and whenever somebody would
ask a question in that halacha in that
circle that was not related to that topic
he
wouldn't like it he'd get flustered and he
would say to his friends
we are here to remember the actions of
the heart we are here to allow our
iman to grow please leave that question for
a
different gathering and once a man called me
aid to his son amar take me to
the house of al-hasan al-basri so they made
their way to al-hasan
al-basri they knocked on the door they opened
the door they greeted each other and then
al-hasan says to him what
brings you here my moon he says fast
i feel that my heart has become a
little bit harder than usual i'm not the
person i used to be from an islamic
perspective
so can you help me soften it please
what did alhassan do he said to him
quran straight away this is going to feature
a lot in our discussion this evening he
said to him
[Music]
and he's on the ground his son his
son he said my father was behaving and
moving his feet like a sheep that had
just been slaughtered
lost his consciousness what did he recite he
recited three verses from the chapter of the
poets where allah subhanahu wa said
tell me if we were to give them
enjoyment for many years
then the punishment that awaited them finally arrives
will they be benefited by all what they
enjoyed these were the verses he had and
he passed out
anyway he regained consciousness and they made their
way out and his son said to his
father on the
way home was that al-hasan al-basri the great
imam we we hear about he said yeah
that was that was al-hasan
he said he said you know i always
had like a bigger picture of the imam
in my mind i thought he'd be something
bigger than that
so his father stopped and he prodded his
son in his chest he said to him
he said my son he had just recited
ayat from the quran which if you properly
understood them
they would have left so many wounds in
your heart no it's the power of the
quran so this dear brothers and sisters is
a
quick snapshot of how our predecessors approached this
topic and gave it utmost attention when was
the last time you visited a hot doctor
when was the last time you went to
a brother a person an individual who you
feel is a specialist in the field or
even half a specialist who can give you
advice about your state of affairs and your
imani at your spirituality when was the last
time you felt the need to do
that they did that and that is why
they were ahead of the game the second
question we'd like to ask now
let's keep this as logically progressive as possible
the second question is
what are the signs of an ill heart
what are the signs that
hardness has slowly started to creep into your
heart and we said success on the day
of
judgment is coming to allah with a sound
heart what are the signs see before i
answer this question
brothers and sisters allow me to say this
the greatest punishment for a crime
is the crime itself why because the person
who does that sin
now needs to live with the consequences of
that crime for the rest of his life
you have committed a crime
and now there is a guilt that lives
inside of your heart and it brings about
the worst type of
pain that is spiritual agitation so people they
do all sorts to mask that pain to
cover it up don't they
they try all sorts they try they try
alcohol they try drugs they try fame
they try music they try to socialize they
try perversity they try sexual experiment
all in in an attempt to do what
to cover the pain that they feel and
some people turn to kuffur to mask
the pain because after all what is kufur
rejection of allah or disbelief what is kofo
from a linguistic perspective it is
to kava and that's where the arabic word
of cover comes from it comes from the
arabic of kufur the english cover comes
from the arabic of kufur so the greatest
crime or the greatest consequence or
punishment for a crime is the crime itself
and that is why
[Music]
he said there is no punishment in existence
that is more severe than being given
a hard heart and feeling alienated from allah
and then he said the hell fire was
only
created to melt those hard hearts a rabbi
from bani israel
he once said he said lord i disobey
you so much
yet you don't punish me so allah subhanahu
wa ta'ala sent revelation
to a local prophet of that era to
go to that rabbi and say to him
that allah almighty says to you
i have been punishing you for so long
that you just don't realize it have i
not taken away from you the
sweetness of being close to me that is
a punishment but some people don't realize it
to have
that hard heart think about it remember those
days when maybe some of you
used to pray at night and it was
a night in night out type of thing
and nothing could stop you and you
enjoyed it you loved it where is that
gone now how come some of us can't
do that anymore is that not enough of
a
punishment or do you think that a punishment
always has to take the form of a
thunderbolt
or an earthquake or sudden death have i
not taken away from you the
sweetness of being near to me of calling
upon me remember those days when used to
call upon allah make dua and weep and
you enjoyed it so much you can do
it for
an hour maybe two where is it now
you can't wait some of us for the
imam
to finish his salah quick enough as if
we've broken free from chains what happened is
that not enough of a punishment in of
itself when was the last time you had
a hadith or an ayah and your eyes
spilled with tears
when was the last time you said that
for the sake of allah if you can't
feel it realize that's enough of a punishment
in of
itself so we are talking now what are
the signs what are the signs of a
heart that has become hard
i'm going to give you a a self
diagnosis kit that has maybe four or five
components
present it against yourself and measure whether this
fits you or not as a description where
is your heart
sign number one to look out for how
does your heart react when the quran
is recited upon it may allah preserve him
who recited heart trembling ayat from suratul bakar
and the story of how do you react
when you hear the quran recited upon you
in the allah are those allah says whom
when
allah's name is remembered their hearts tremble
and when the verses of allah are recited
upon them it increases them in iman
and they rely upon allah where is your
heart facing when you hear the quran think
about
omar he is walking in the middle of
the night in medina checking up on his
flock and he hears a man standing up
in prayer
in qiyam and he is reciting the verse
in
the punishment of your lord must happen
[Music]
no one can repel it speaking about the
punishment that has to befall the kuffar on
the day of judgement um
i swear this is the truth from allah
and he rushed to his home and he
fell ill
and people spent a whole month visiting him
he couldn't leave his house he was bed-bound
visiting him as a sick person not knowing
that he wasn't sick it was just
the majesty of the quran so this is
number one from your self-diagnosis king where is
your heart when quran is being
recited number two when was the last time
you shed a tear in the cause of
allah i'm not here to
entertain you my dear brothers my dear sisters
we want to find answers from the house
of allah when was the last time you
recited the
quran you heard the hadith you were in
a lecture you saw something in the streets
and you said that tear in remembrance of
your lord a dear brother contact me not
too long ago he said to me people
are saying that maybe my repentance will not
be accepted because i haven't cried about it
is crying a condition of repentance i made
it clear to him that weeping is not
a condition of repentance the scholars have made
it clear how tawba is
done and what the conditions are regret is
the most important thing you don't necessarily need
to cry but at the same token we
peeing in the cause of
allah has its place in islam didn't allah
say in suratu al-israh when they hear the
quran
they fall to their faces crying allah said
and they increase in submission
and then allah almighty say about some christians
who heard the quran
and when they hear the quran being recited
that which was revealed upon you their eyes
overflow with tears because they
have just recognized the truth so it has
its place and that young man who
remembers allah privately and so he cries allah
promises him a place under his shade on
the day of
judgment when there is no shade but his
so it has its place he said for
me to shed a tear for allah
is more beloved to me than to give
one thousand out of gold in charity because
it means something so we said
sign number one how do you behave when
quran is recited number two when was the
last time you shed a tear
in the cause of allah from his love
from your sense of indebtedness to him your
gratitude for him your desire to be
near him you're yearning for him your sense
of warmth and being close to him as
one brother told us recently in a
umrah trip he said it was so strange
he's a river brother he said i was
making dua when i was doing tawaf you
remember he said i was making dua
and he i felt as if god was
saying to me okay okay he said it's
like i could hear it
everything i was asking for it's like i
could hear allah say to me sure no
problem you've got it it's all yours
when was the last time your eye shed
a tear in the cause of allah number
two number three test your heart with this
how do you behave when advice is given
to you how do you behave when someone
calls out a mistake
in your dress in your tone of voice
in your salah in your hijab
in the way you talk to mom and
dad how do you behave when truth is
presented to you test the softness of your
heart on that basis
the imam he says the hard heart
will reject truth even if the evidences are
many it's not about evidences the heart can't
receive it there's a veil you say to
him
my dear brother may allah preserve you allah
said abc this is not correct bro he
says why are you why are you even
talking to me
why are you calling out my faults why
don't you look in the mirror and do
deal with your own faults what about your
brother what about your wife what about your
family he can't hack it
or you say to our sister my dear
sister the messenger sallallahu alaihi wasallam said abc
she said why are you judging me don't
judge me
you take your male patriarchy out of here
you speak to somebody else right that is
a sign of a hard heart
that you're unable to accept truth or advice
and you resist it number four
test your heart with this how do you
feel when it comes to the topic of
death
imam al-ghazali complained that people during his time
were seen laughing and joking in the graveyard
that's as early as imam al-ghazali's time he
says people
are laughing during the funeral procession they're talking
we really me you and i have seen
people smoking on the graveyard and and the
man is being buried right in
front of them transferred to the hereafter he
said people instead of discussing death they're discussing
the inheritance of the man he's just dying
whereas if he said that i remember seeing
the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam sat on the
edge of a grave
looking inside of an empty grave and crying
his eyes out till the soil beneath him
was wet
and then he raised his head to us
and he said brothers this is what needs
preparation
this is what i want you to prepare
for how do you behave on quran is
recited how do you behave
when advice is given to you how do
you behave when you see the sight
of death these are some of the questions
that a person can ask himself herself to
test
where your heart is is it hard is
it soft does it need work now if
you are like me you come out of
an exercise like that
thinking right i've i've got some work to
do
my heart is somewhat hard what's the next
step let's go to the next step now
the next step dear brothers dear sisters is
to test and trace
you have to use terminology that's in at
the moment right it's all about tests and
traits test and trace trace the cause of
that hardness where
is it because if you do it you'll
find it if you ask allah to help
you he'll show you
allah gave you a healthy set of lungs
healthy set of kidneys healthy set of limbs
he gave you a healthy islamic heart i
and you we have corrupted it somewhere down
the line so if you feel that it's
not the heart you want it to be
you and i need to go home
and check in with ourselves and think right
where have i gone wrong don't blame allah
blame yourself because what does allah say allah
told us you started it you started it
their hearts were sealed because of their disbelief
so what came first what came first
disbelief and as a result what happened heart
was sealed we started it
when they first deviated we then deviated the
heart so who deviated first we did so
what happened then
the heart deviated and allah said
because they kept breaking their covenants we cursed
them and we made their hearts hard
so what happened first they broke the covenants
so their hearts became hard what i'm trying
to show you dear brothers dear sisters is
that we started
this war if you think honestly sincerely deeply
honestly
unapologetically you will discover the cause of that
heart that had become hard you or i
have
introduced a sin between us and allah or
between us and the people somewhere along the
lines so track it down test and trace
you'll find it this is the
first step think about it could it be
my salah that i'm praying half-heartedly
three a day two a day max or
my salah that is not being done on
time that has an effect on the heart
could it be my finances my commerce haram
business be honest with yourself habibi don't go
fatwa
shopping because you'll find whatever you want it
will not save you from allah haram money
you put into your system
it affects the heart could it be a
fallout that you've had with a relative
you're not speaking to auntie to uncle to
cousin a sibling of yours you guys are
not on talking times that affects the heart
could it be because you're spending too much
time in town could it be could it
be because
you raised your voice at your mother instant
blackening of the heart careful where is it
where did it start if you are honest
he is good in your heart he'll give
you good search for it you will find
it one brother he told me
recently i have been doing everything under the
sun to soften up my heart i am
not seeing really the result that i want
so on one day subhanallah he said here
in this masjid in the front row
i think i found the problem there is
a person who used to work for me
and i think i didn't do him justice
please place mercy in his heart allow me
to allow me to ask him for forgiveness
just for the sake of my heart he
said
allah brought him to the very first row
as we were praying we put our hands
together we hugged
and i forgave him and he forgave me
and i am beginning to see i am
beginning to see goodness see test and trace
be honest with yourself don't be selective flush
it all out when you have found it
you've isolated it you've made a plan to
get rid of those sins or to act
upon the obligations you haven't been acting upon
now we're ready to speak about the last
section from this talk which is what are
the rectifiers of the heart
what are the things that allow the heart
to flourish if that's the type of heart
you want then pay attention dear brothers dear
sisters you've taken out the illness you've identified
it you've removed the obstacle now the heart
is ready to receive the
why the revelation of allah subhana wa the
vessel is claimed what are the rectifiers where
do you find them i will give you
i will give you seven inshallah the first
of them and i told you it's going
to feature a lot in this lecture
my dear brothers my dear sisters and the
remembrance of allah nothing in existence
will have a greater impact on your heart
if you give it attention and you recite
it attentively with some understanding
nothing will reform that heart more than the
book of allah why is that because
allah has brought down the best of all
speech a book of perfect consistency with
repeated lessons that causes the skin of the
people who
fear allah to tremble so then their skins
and their heart both
soften at the remembrance of allah this is
the effect of the quran and i remember
the amazing words of
the contemporary reformer of algeria he said
i swear by the one whom
he said i swear by the one besides
whom no none should be worshipped in my
life i have never seen anything despite my
sins he said and deficiencies i have never
seen anything that is better at softening the
heart
and bringing down the tear and producing fear
of allah and encouraging repentance then the recitation
of the quran and
hearing the book of allah subhanahu wa this
is number one the book of allah number
two
be wary of becoming obsessively attached with dunya
easier said than done right careful here your
brothers and sisters because you are the muslims
of the 21st century
and you're living in a very strange era
the offerings of dunya have not just increased
in terms of
quantity and availability because of what you see
on social media and exposure no there is
another problem that makes it a little bit
more
complicated the offerings of life today more than
ever before are
personalized to fit your nephew your soul dunya
is tailored
it's ergonomically designed it's bespoke to what your
desire craves
there's nothing standard anymore about the offerings of
life and you're telling me with all of
that your heart my heart is going to
be
unaffected impossible allah said i have not placed
two hearts
in the chest of any one man it's
the one heart that you and i the
masaki we possess if that is filled with
dunya there's no space for allah dunya has
opened itself up for for us
especially here in the west we by the
way in the west the average person is
living a higher standard lifestyle than
kings not too long ago so not only
is dunya available it is
tailored to your taste tail it to your
desire what do you want because it's about
you think about it
take coffee for example back in the days
maybe our fathers know this better than us
and our grandparents you just go into any
old shop and you say
can i have a cup of coffee please
that's it there wasn't there wasn't anything about
that discussion that was complicated
because there was maybe two or three dominant
brands of coffee at the time they all
tasted the same no real competition in the
market
what is it maxwell coffee house good to
the last drop right that's it can i
have a coffee done bob's
your uncle nowadays god help you you want
a coffee what type of coffee you're there
waiting for a long time
just to get to the end of the
queue because everyone has a particular way of
customizing his coffee what type of coffee do
you want well i mean what do
you want you want your arabica coffee you
want your americano you want your uh your
espresso your single shot your double shot you
want
your cappuccino you want your frappuccino you want
your latte you want your mocha what do
you want and then you want it with
milk without milk filtered
milk unfiltered milk semi skin full fat or
just skimmed two percent milk what do you
want you want foam on the top you
want chocolate sprinkle on the top how do
you
like it and then and then you get
to choose your ambience you know if you
if you're from maybe uh
somewhere from the gulf right we'll see brothers
there drinking their coffees maybe in the in
the nearer the cafe neros they like that
vibe
and then maybe if you know you're a
young man like yourself maybe it's it's the
starbucks maybe if you're an old man a
granny like myself you know you prefer
you prefer the custard kind of vibe it's
all there tail it to your desire you're
telling me it's not blinding after a while
olive oil my father-in-law was saying to me
you know ali back in the days when
we first came to this country that's just
my father-in-law not my grandad
one generation before me he said back in
the days when we wanted to eat olive
oil because middle eastern cuisine is heavily based
on olive oil he said you don't get
it in your tesco's and your ass doesn't
have to go to a chemist
it's like a medicine to find olive oil
nowadays alhamdulillah it's a household product right what
do you want your
your normal oil cooking oil your olive oil
virgin olive oil extra virgin olive oil and
then premium extra
virgin olive oil filtered unfiltered normal pressed cold
pressed what type of oil do you want
it's all that tailored
to your desire to your taste you telling
me that's not distracting
doesn't affect the heart at all and then
subhanallah these varieties
this tailored design of your desire it's not
just in the halal things unfortunately it's gone
to the
prohibited things in all of their variations take
music for example back in the days what
options did you have
i mean traditionally traditional cultural society was divided
into upper class lower class and then you
had
music to reflect upper class music to reflect
the lower class so you had the upper
class type of music they called it high
music and then you had the
the kind of the commoner type of music
what they called popular music that's it two
genres
or in europe they call it they call
it classical music
and folk music classical folk nowadays subhanallah it's
an explosion of variety
tail it to what you want to hear
look at the genres there's no end to
them do you want country you want rock
hip hop blues right jazz oprah what do
you want wrap metal
it's all there and then each one of
those genres can be opened up into many
sub genres right
so you take metal music then you get
under it what heavy metal black metal gothic
metal viking metal
pagan metal speed metal power metal this is
a reality
and then each one of those sub-genres has
a particular clothing that you wear a certain
type of identity for that
genre of music and a certain being of
how you present yourself and a certain vocab
that you use to identify
you telling me that these things don't distract
us these things don't occupy us come on
how is it that all of this access
and availability and ergonomically designed desires to fit
your preference doesn't
somehow end up producing this little mini monster
who is always on a tantrum with anxiety
and stress issues because he
wants to get what he wants right now
and how he wants it and if there
is a slight delay she can't take it
he can't take it
that's what we've become brothers and sisters we're
we're bedazzled by dunya we we can't help
it we've become like that deer that's looking
at the
headlights of the car and he's just gaping
at it the car is about to hit
him but he can't move that's how so
many of us are behaving
with the offerings of dunya today especially here
in the west staring at it waiting for
a collision course with death
to take us by surprise it does affect
us and it is distracting
and some of us are so entangled within
the nets of dunya because you see it
in their conversation they can only talk about
business and trade and commerce
and bitcoin they can't do anything and shoes
and makeup it's a multi-billion-dollar industry
it's not just it's distracting brothers and sisters
let's be honest and that is why amir
al-marahi said
he said train yourself to live a life
of coarseness because blessings don't last forever
live a harsh lifestyle he is saying from
time to time learn how to be coarse
rough
because blessings don't last and for that obey
the companion he said
the prophet alaihi wasallam instructed us to walk
without shoes sometimes subhanallah
he instructed us to walk barefooted at times
why just to remind yourself you're you're a
poor traveler to allah
that's what you are we are poor weak
travelers to allah take off your shoes remember
the reality don't get too caught up with
your platforms and your
jordans and your air forces take them off
remember where are you going who you really
are subhanallah so we said number one
the rectify of the quran number two be
wary of becoming obsessively attached with dunya
number three beware of excessiveness in general excessiveness
going overboard with everything it affects the heart
malice i mean i'll give you just one
example eating
we have an issue with obesity and it's
one of the signs of the day of
judgment that way of simmering people become fat
it's a sign
of the day of judgment right and the
first thing that is affected are
not your veins or your heart or your
capillaries the first thing that is affected if
you overeat is the heart you feel it
imam
he was asked the question can a man
experience a softness in his
heart when his belly is full he said
i don't think it's possible and imam shafi'i
he said
for the last 16 years of my life
i have not eaten to my full except
once
and so i put my finger in my
throat and i vomited out everything and look
there is a surah in the quran named
after him
he said to his your ability to think
to contemplate
will fall asleep
he said whoever wants to cause his eyes
to weep and his heart to fill with
submissiveness to allah then you have to
eat half full of your stomach fill only
half of your stomach with fruit
so we don't know of any uh influential
muslim reformer who was praised for being a
big eater by the way
all right let's make this clear he said
we don't know of any imam or any
scholar of the religion who was praised
in his biography for being a big eater
he said the only things that are praised
for eating a lot are animals
that are fattened up and then they are
slaughtered because they have no minds but in
our culture it's different i
don't know in the indo-pak culture how it
is brothers but with us it's like each
this much masha allah habib you're
not going to hit him with ayan with
hajj nothing to envy there that's the curse
that's not praise
you praise a cow for eating a lot
you praise an ox for eating a lot
you don't pray as a human being for
eating a
lot stomach is this big it's big as
your fist that's all is if you want
to have a big meal it has to
fit two liters it grows 40 times the
stomach does not want to do that and
instantly the effects of that goes to your
heart so avoiding excessiveness
in everything excessiveness are in eating excessiveness in
socializing marriage
excessiveness in sleeping excessiveness in working excessiveness in
browsing the net
excessiveness shopping spending time in the markets too
much of it excessiveness with laughter all of
these things affect the heart
excessiveness of everything hardens the heart accept one
thing and that is worship the more you
do of it
the softer your heart becomes so this was
number one brothers this was number
number three avoiding excessiveness in all things number
four let us hurry up now
for those who want to rectify their hearts
be in the companionship of good people you
know where to find them
by allah there are certain faces out there
just by looking at them without them opening
their mouths or
saying anything you feel that your anxieties have
left you and your stress has departed your
chest has expanded
your heart has illuminated just by looking at
them allah some of them are in this
room i swear
without them speaking and that is why in
hadith the messenger
said the allies of allah the saints
they are those people whom when you see
them the name of allah is remembered
you look at him you can't help but
say where did that come from you look
at him you say subhanallah
right what is a saint awali somebody who
walks on the water flies in the air
cuts himself without bleeding habibi that's a
shaytan that's not a walia singh a saint
is somebody whom when you see from the
many characteristics you remember they said
about who is the sheikh of imam when
people would look at his face they
would say that's an angel yeah and muhammad
the famous interpreter of dreams
servant of anna subunic when they would see
him they would glorify allah because of the
radiance of light that was emanating
from his face he also discusses how they
felt when they were anxious and scared and
afraid
and they would go to their teachers say
holy sh just by looking at him and
hearing his words and all of it transforms
into strength and certainty
and determination and resilience and iman some faces
you look at them you remember allah and
there are some faces you look
at him and what do you remember you
remember shaytaan and you remember sins and you
remember
your past ways and you remember laziness and
you remember urges and cravings and yearnings and
haram
these are the faces to be avoided so
we said number four is what being in
the companionship of what
good people find them and be with them
just looking at them is healthy number five
being in the companionship of those who are
dying and those who have died
if you hear of somebody in your locality
who is going through the pangs of death
khalas he's dying the process of transfer has
begun
if you can gather your nerves go and
seek permission from the family if you can
sit in that room for just a moment
and listen and hear the noises and tell
me if you come out that room as
the same person or not
tell me if you will struggle to keep
your desires at bay after that or not
try that
if the thought of death disappeared from my
mind for just a moment i would fear
that my heart was going
corrupt so you can't find somebody who is
dying go to the places of people who've
died
sit with them go to a graveyard please
spend some time there and i remember growing
up as a teenager one of the biggest
things
that affected me and helped me start to
too we hope we are practicing we don't
really know but one of the things that
really put us on a path was seeing
certain brothers in the graveyards on a weekly
basis even during their wedding days one of
the brothers was there in the graveyard in
his hoodie just sat there thinking about death
on the day he would get married that
was just seeing someone who was at
the graveyard what about if you are at
the graveyard yourself do it brothers and sisters
that is number one number five
number six being in your own private company
especially during the depths of the
night there has to be a point in
your life a point in your night or
in your day where you disconnect you
throw away your phone from everyone and everything
you've disconnected and you're connecting only to the
creator of the heavens and the
earth to think about the big meanings of
life why am i here where am i
going and you will be rewarded
one of the things that began prophethood was
an intense desire that he had alaihis wasallam
to make his way up to
almost a 45-minute trek to sit in a
small dingy cave big enough for maybe one
or two people max
and he'd spend days upon days there with
no social media no internet no phone just
to be alone to think about these values
and these
meanings of life and allah rewarded him he
sent him an angel and he became an
abhi a prophet and if you do the
same
you find moments that you sit with yourself
by yourself with no one but yourself and
your lord allah will reward you and he
will give you a station of
nearness to him what that's what is the
best time to do this
said the rising of the night is the
best way of subduing yourself and giving you
upright speech
if that last third of the night was
able to speak it would tell you of
the sheer number of
sins that were forgiven during it and the
number of people who were given jannah during
it and the financial burdens that were
alleviated during it and the faults and the
crimes and the sins of man that were
covered during it and children
from barren parents that were given during it
and anxieties and worries are alleviated during it
remember brothers and sisters
give yourself time to disconnect with everyone everything
but your lord and don't allow the grind
of life to confuse you or to occupy
you even if
that grind is islamic work you need the
time to move away from sheikh fulan and
imam fulan and book
fulan and sit only with your lord subhanahu
wata'ala which will bring about a light and
a tranquility and a
comfort and a strength and an excitement and
a contentment that no one can describe but
those who've experienced it
try it lastly and i will leave you
with this this is number one
number seven for those who are searching for
a soft heart beware of using your heart
for other than what it was created for
your heart was created to do big things
your heart was designed to glorify allah and
if you do something with your heart
other than what it is compatible with it
will ache and it will start to throb
and you will be scared you will be
down
your heart imagine that it is like a
key that has certain ridges it only fits
perfectly when it is near
allah put it in a sin it is
out of place and it begins to burn
with pain
because you're not using it for what it
was intended for imagine imagine somebody trying to
drink by pouring the
water into his ear imagine somebody trying to
eat using his eye
the outcome of both is what damage because
the ear was designed to receive sound not
water and the eye was designed
to receive light not food similarly your heart
was not designed for those dms those private
conversations to sell
drugs to miss salah to mess about with
your hijab your heart was not designed for
that your heart was designed to be close
to allah to glorify him
and when you don't do that you will
feel pain according to the size and the
length of time that you've been engaged in
that crime
remember this you want to know what a
good deed and what a sin does listen
to the words of abdullah
and luminosity in the heart and strength in
your body and expands in your money your
risk your provisions and love in
the hearts of the people for you masha'allah
what is the opposite of
darkness in the face gloominess in the heart
weakness in your body limitation in your
risk your provisions and hatred in the hearts
of people
brothers and sisters we have finished the lecture
for this evening i just want you to
do one thing
i want us collectively to not give up
to not despair
if you're knocking on that door and it's
not opening yeah you've got two options either
you turn away from the door and you
leave allah
or either you keep knocking which one is
more profitable some of our predecessors they said
we learned patience
i learned patience from a young boy i
once saw standing in the doorstep of his
mother's house when i was making my way
to salah his
mom was beating him up punishing him that
she kicked him out the house she'd get
out of the house so he came out
the house and he was very
upset and then he sat on the doorstep
and he realized where am i going to
go so he started to cry
and then he put his head on the
doorstep and he was saying to his mom
i'm so sorry speaking from behind forgive me
i made a mistake he said by the
time i
came back from salah she opened the door
and let him back in he said so
i stopped and i cried and i said
if subhanallah
person keeps knocking on the door of allah
soon enough the door will open soon enough
it will open
f one of the predecessors said i i
kept dragging my soul to come to allah
whilst
he was crying he didn't want to come
with me he was crying until it finally
surrendered and it came to me towards
allah smiling happy laughing who will win keep
knocking it may take you a year it
may take you two it may take you
ten it
took some of our predecessors twenty but you'll
get there in the end you will get
there and the heart will soften and light
will come in and you will be the
happiest muslim on planet earth we ask allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala to soften our hearts and
to illuminate them in the light of iman
we
ask allah subhanahu talah to forgive our sins
to rectify our affairs and to forgive us
and our mothers and our fathers and our
children our teachers